The ‘Anna Bhagya’ scheme is one of the five main election promises made by the Congress party in the run-up to the Karnataka Assembly elections, in May 2023, with the pledge to provide an additional five kilograms of free rice to every member of a Below Poverty Line household. The Congress party’s (lack of) vision is as disappointing as the central government’s policy.Even the fiercest critics of the PDS were compelled to recognise its key role in protecting people from hunger during the COVID-19 -related lockdowns. Many believe that the coverage of 80 crore people (during the pandemic) is not only laudable (it is) but also adequate (it is not). Besides inadequate coverage, in most States, the PDS does not provide nutritious food items such as pulses and oil. These are the two lacunae that should be rectified.
In late March 2020, the central government announced that it would double rations for those who have ration cards. For the situation then, this was a good move. But even then it did nothing for those who did not have ration cards — and there were plenty of them.The National Food Security Act (NFSA) 2013 expanded the coverage of the PDS substantially. So, why are so many people still without ration cards? The law mandates that 50% of the urban and 75% of the rural populations must be covered by the PDS. The central government combined these coverage ratios (adjusted to account for State-wise poverty levels) with the 2011 population numbers to determine each State’s ‘quota’ of ration cards. As the NFSA rolled out (staggered across States between 2013-2017), PDS coverage climbed from under 500 million to reach 800 million — its current level.
The problem is that even in 2023, India continues to use the 2011 Census population because the central government is blissfully evading its obligation to conduct the 2021 Census. The NFSA requires that the latest completed Census be used to calculate the total PDS coverage. The government, thus, has a convenient excuse to ignore demands to expand PDS coverage to account for population growth. At the all-India level, the under-coverage results in the exclusion of an estimated 113 million people, of whom 1.1 million are in Karnataka.The Food Corporation of India (FCI) procures grain for three broad purposes. One, it supports producers by procuring (mainly) wheat and rice at minimum support prices (MSP). Two, the central government uses this to meet the needs of the PDS (providing five kilograms a person every month free to NFSA households), a consumer subsidy. Three, the stocks are used for price stabilisation through the OMSS.
Some States use their own budgets to “top up” PDS coverage through the Open Market Sale Scheme (OMSS) — for example, Tamil Nadu — or local procurement — for example, Odisha and Chhattisgarh. Curiously, no State government – not even those led by non-Bharatiya Janata Party parties — appears to have taken up the issue of under-coverage due to outdated population estimates with the central government.
The OMSS has been in the news recently. It is crucial for those States that go beyond NFSA entitlements. This is especially true for States such as Tamil Nadu that rely on OMSS bulk sales by the FCI to support their unique universal PDS. During COVID-19, many States used OMSS grain to run community kitchens and supply food packets. This is the route that the Karnataka government was relying on to fulfil its ‘Anna Bhagya’ promise, roughly doubling rice benefits from their current level. When Karnataka sought OMSS grain for the ‘Anna Bhagya’ promise, the central government said that it would no longer allow States to buy OMSS grain.
The central government has given three reasons for the discontinuation of OMSS for State governments. One, it claims that the OMSS can perform its price stabilisation role better if the grain is released through the market rather than through States/the PDS. This is not a convincing argument as the two are more or less equivalent. In fact, there is no guarantee that private traders who get OMSS rice at fixed prices will pass on the benefits to consumers.
Two, the central government has expressed worries about maintaining grain stocks at a “comfortable level”. While it may be true that procurement this year will be lower than previous years, what the government fails to mention is that its current stock position is, in fact, very comfortable. For the past five years, including when the central government was providing double rations as relief during the COVID-19 pandemic, stocks have tended to be twice as high as the buffer stock norms (see chart).
Three, it has reportedly stated that “State governments are going to give the foodgrains to the same beneficiaries” as under the NFSA or for beneficiaries of State schemes, and that the central government has an obligation to the 600 million people who are not covered by the PDS.
The central government’s obligation to the 600 million people outside the PDS is best met by other means — for example updating PDS coverage by using the projected population for 2023. Had the Congress in Karnataka promised an expansion of the PDS, it could have escaped this reasoning given by the central government. Blocking OMSS sales to States suggests that while the central government is unwilling to spend on this, it wants to prevent State governments from doing so.
The Congress party’s ‘Anna Bhagya’ promise betrayed a lack of vision for food security. Why promise more rice to those who already get five kilograms each month, especially when over one million people in the State, who should be a part of the PDS are excluded because of outdated Census figures. Why not extend NFSA benefits to them instead?
It is also time to think beyond rice and wheat through the PDS. When it comes to Karnataka’s neighbours such as Tamil Nadu and Andhra Pradesh and elsewhere (in Himachal Pradesh), PDS ration card holders get heavily subsidised pulses and oil through the PDS.
The Karnataka government is well placed to expand its PDS to include 1.1 million excluded people and provide them with five kilograms of grains a person every month (either rice or millets or a combination of the two). Procuring millets to meet the obligations of an expanded PDS is a sensible option, at least temporarily. Millets such as ragi are part of the local diet anyway and are equally if not more nutritious than rice. Karnataka is a major producer of millets; if the State procures at MSP, it could support its farmers as well as consumers.
For existing PDS beneficiaries (who were promised ‘Anna Bhagya’ rice) and new card holders, the State can provide them two kilograms of dal and a kilogram/litre of oil for free each month. The expansion and diversification of the PDS will cost the State roughly the same as the ‘Anna Bhagya’ promise. More importantly, compared with the cash transfer to existing PDS households that the State is currently considering, an expanded and diversified PDS is more valuable from the point of view of social (as opposed to individual) benefits.
The Gujarat High Court order declining to stay the conviction of Congress leader Rahul Gandhi in a defamation case is quite unreasonable and borders on the fanciful. Justice Hemant M. Prachchhak becomes the third judicial authority in Gujarat to rule that Mr. Gandhi, in using the words “Why do all these thieves have Modi as a surname?” in an election campaign speech in 2019, had committed defamation against a large number of people and that it was a “serious offence”. The purported seriousness of the offence has been cited to justify the award of a two-year jail term, the maximum punishment for defamation. While the remark is unlikely to have troubled or caused any reputational harm to any reasonable person, the trial magistrate, a civil court hearing an appeal against conviction, and now, the High Court, have unanimously concluded that the offence is grave, amounting to moral turpitude. The High Court has agreed with the first appellate court that Mr. Gandhi does not deserve the benefit of stay of conviction, an order that would help overcome his disqualification from the Lok Sabha. It has enthusiastically endorsed the conclusion that the offence is grave because it was committed by a Member of Parliament and leader of a party that had ruled the country for decades and that it was a speech that contained a false statement made with intent to affect the outcome of an election.
The court has controversially ruled that the statement has defamed a determinable group of people, referring to those with the surname ‘Modi’. It has thus rejected the key argument that 13 crore people with the surname could not have been aggrieved by that sentence. How the court concluded that a large number of people were aggrieved is not clear when no one except the complainant has claimed harm to reputation. It is disconcerting that court after court has endorsed a punishment tailored specifically to disqualify a Member of Parliament. The High Court has also ignored the argument that a legislator cannot be pushed out of the House and barred from electoral contest for an offence that was neither serious nor involved moral turpitude. Instead, it has made a fanciful claim that the law’s object is to maintain purity in politics and cited the pendency of other cases against Mr. Gandhi to decline to stay the conviction. It has even referred to a complaint by V.D. Savarkar’s grandson against Mr. Gandhi, as though a political remark could add another layer of gravity to the offence. The extent to which a judicial order can go to make a defamation case sound like a horrific crime against society at large is quite astounding.
The Biden administration’s decision to send cluster munitions to Ukraine to fight the Russian invasion shows both the challenges Kyiv and its western allies face in the prolonged war and the U.S.’s readiness to escalate it to push back the Russians. Cluster munitions are designed to explode on impact, but many remain “duds”, which can explode later, causing indiscriminate harm — the reason why over 100 countries have banned them. The U.S., though not a signatory to the Convention on Cluster Munitions, had criticised Russia in the recent past for using these munitions in the conflict as amounting to war crimes. But the U.S.’s U-turn now, as part of its 42nd aid package to Ukraine since the Russian invasion began, points to the strains Ukraine is facing on the battlefield. In a war dominated by artillery, Ukraine is entirely dependent on the West for weapons that include artillery shells and ammunition, while Russia’s industrial base has picked up, ensuring an uninterrupted supply of weapons to the front lines. The conventional war has strained western reserves, leaving Ukraine at a disadvantageous position when compared to Russia’s artillery superiority.
Before Ukraine began its counteroffensive a few weeks ago, the western calculation was that swift battlefield victories by Ukraine, like its lightning counter-advances in Kharkiv and Kherson last year, would change the dynamics and put Russia’s President Vladimir Putin under pressure. But the Russians, over the last few months, have built strong defence fortifications along the over 1,000-km long front line, from Kherson in the south to the outskirts of Kharkiv in the northeast, which the Ukrainians have found extremely difficult to break through. Ukraine has made some minor territorial gains in southeast, but at a heavy cost, and is far from achieving its perceived breakthrough of cutting off Mr. Putin’s landbridge in Zaporizhzhia, separating the Russian-controlled Donbas in the east from Crimea in the south. It is this reality of the battlefield that led the U.S. to take what President Biden called “the difficult decision” of sending cluster munitions. However, this would still raise criticism. The alleged war crimes committed by Russia in Ukraine have been well documented and slammed internationally. Kyiv is also being accused of targeting civilian centres in the Donbas. But the U.S. has tried to draw a moral and ethical line, no doubt thin, by saying it was helping Ukraine defend itself. This line gets blurred with the decision to send the civilian killer munitions to the battlefield. It also shows that no side is willing to make a compromise as yet, irrespective of their battlefield positions, as the war, even after 16 months of fighting, still stays in an escalation spiral.
Newsan is one of Argentina’s biggest home appliance retailers. For decades, it settled its payments in U.S. dollars for the goods it bought from China, such as fridges and TV sets. In April, Newsan suddenly switched to Chinese yuan for its payments. Meanwhile, Brazil’s new government under President Lula da Silva recently announced that Brazilian companies can settle their foreign trade using the Chinese yuan. Consequently, Brazilian companies have started to pay French companies in yuan for the purchase of LNG, a first in their history. The yuan is now the most actively traded currency in Russia. And Bangladesh has been coerced into paying for Russian nuclear power using the yuan (all reported in The Washington Post). These developments are not independent and unrelated.
A significant global outcome of the Russia-Ukraine conflict is the U.S. dollar-Chinese yuan conflict. The U.S. dollar has long enjoyed what a French Finance Minister called an “exorbitant privilege”. Nearly all nations trade with each other using the U.S. dollar, establishing its pre-eminence as the world’s reserve currency. Global trust in the dollar plays a vital role in establishing the U.S.’s status as a superpower. Evidently, the Chinese are no longer willing to accept American hegemony. Destabilising and dethroning the U.S. dollar is a key strategy for China to challenge the U.S. Its overtures and coercions to invoke other nations to switch to the yuan for trade settlements are a part of its grand ambitions to reshape the world order. In this context, India, a trillion-dollar trading nation, has a huge role to play in determining the new global currency order.
China is squatting on India’s territory in the Northeast and has threatened its sovereign integrity. It came close to waging a war against India during the pandemic. It is not in India’s interests to help China’s ascendancy, so one would expect India to not aid and abet China’s desire to move global trade settlements from the dollar to the yuan. But shockingly, this is precisely what it is doing — paying for its own foreign trade in yuan.
The Modi government’s myopic geo-economic strategy has boxed India into a corner where it is now forced to help China to the detriment of its own interests. After economic sanctions were imposed by the West against Russia for the Ukraine war, the Modi government decided not to support the sanctions and instead buy Russian oil, because it was apparently available at a discount. The External Affairs and Petroleum Ministers made chest-thumping announcements about how doing so would help the common Indian with lower fuel prices and inflation. Since the war began, India has imported 15 times more oil from Russia (compared to the previous year), worth $44 billion, money that presumably can be used by Russia to prolong the war.
There was one hitch in this saga – how would India pay Russia for the oil? Normally, it would have paid Russia in U.S. dollars, as it does for most of its foreign trade. But due to U.S. sanctions, Russia could not accept this. Russia could have accepted payment in roubles, but this was not favourable to India, since the value of roubles could no longer be efficiently determined by the currency markets. A bilateral arrangement to establish a mutual value between the rupee and the rouble was mooted, but this would hark India back to the pre-liberalisation days of bilateral currency arrangements. India would have liked to pay in rupees but this was not conducive to Russia because, contrary to the bombastic claims of the Reserve Bank of India, the Indian rupee is neither an international nor a trusted currency, especially after bizarre policies such as demonetisation. China sensed an opportunity in this conundrum and given its proximity to Russia, the yuan has emerged as the currency to settle India’s purchase of Russian oil.
If India can settle Russian trade in yuan, what stops China from demanding settlements for India-China trade in yuan? India-China trade has grown four times in the last decade and is one-sided, with India importing seven times more from China than it exports. China is India’s second-largest trading partner while India is only China’s 13th-largest partner. In this context, it will be hard for India to refuse or resist a potential Chinese demand for trade settlement in yuan. If India starts to use the yuan for a sizeable proportion of its trade, it would provide a big fillip to China’s ambitions to dominate the new world order. This is what former Prime Minister Dr. Manmohan Singh had warned more than a year ago, in The Hindu. In essence, just when China was threatening to trample India, the Modi government’s foolhardy headline-hunting geo-economic strategy has helped lift China’s foot and place it on India’s neck.
Ironically, this brouhaha has not even benefited the common Indian. The price of petrol, diesel and LPG for the average Indian family has only gone up since the purchase of Russian oil. Prices of essential goods have risen 5% in this period. One reason for this is that half the discounted Russian oil went to Reliance Industries and Nayara Energy, which refined and exported it back to foreign countries at high prices to earn super-normal profits.
Mr. Modi staked India’s national security interests and strengthened China only to help two private companies amass huge profits using the Ukraine war as an alibi. In 1971, when asked by foreign media about the role of the U.S. dollar, the then U.S. Treasury Secretary John Connally famously said, “The dollar is our currency but your problem”. Perhaps, some of India’s big industrialists can now sarcastically quip to other Indians, “Mr. Modi is our Prime Minister but your problem”.
In June 2022, the member-countries of the World Trade Organization (WTO) managed to hammer out a face-saving deal — India played a vital role — at the Geneva ministerial conference, thereby keeping faith in trade multilateralism alive. An important part was resurrecting the WTO’s dispute settlement system (DSS), also called WTO’s ‘crown jewel’, by 2024. Since 2019, the WTO’s two-tiered DSS remains paralysed. The appellate body, which is the second tier of the WTO’s DSS that hears appeals from WTO panels, is non-functional because the United States, single-handedly, has blocked the appointment of its members. The appellate body, from 1995-2019, has upheld the international rule of law by holding powerful countries such as the U.S. and the European Union accountable for international law breaches. However, the appellate body has become a victim of its success. Its one-time supporter, the U.S., has become its most acerbic critic. Now, the clock is ticking, and from the information publicly available, it looks unlikely that the DSS will be in the pink by 2024.
The U.S. reproaches the appellate body for judicial overreach and exceeding its assigned institutional mandate. Thus it argues that till the time the appellate body’s role is defined precisely, it cannot be resurrected. One major problem that the U.S. identifies is that the appellate body, contrary to the text of the WTO’s dispute settlement understanding (DSU), has been creating binding precedents through its decisions.
It is well-established that there is no rule of stare decisis — i.e., no rule of precedent in international law. The WTO’s DSU also makes this clear in Article 3.2 by stating that the appellate body rulings can neither add nor diminish the rights and obligations of WTO member-countries. However, the same Article also says: “The dispute settlement system of the WTO is a central element in providing security and predictability to the multilateral trading system.” Thus, it is incumbent on the appellate body to ensure that there is consistency in the interpretation and application of the WTO agreements without creating a binding precedent. This requires striking a fine balance — precisely what the appellate body has tried to do. It has encouraged the WTO panels to rely on previous interpretations especially where the issues are the same. Simultaneously, the appellate body has clarified that a departure can be made from the previous rulings and reasoning if there are “cogent reasons”. The argument that this means that the appellate body is following a system of precedent in the sense it is followed in the common law system is tantamount to vastly overstating the case, as James Bacchus and Simon Lester argue.
Moreover, the appellate body is not the only international court that follows its previous decisions. Other international courts such as the International Court of Justice and the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea also follow past decisions unless there are valid reasons not to do so. At any rate, it has been proposed that the WTO member-countries can adopt a statement that the appellate body rulings do not create precedents. However, it will not satisfy the U.S.
The larger game plan of the U.S. seems to be the de-judicialisation of trade multilateralism as we know it. The WTO was created in a world that was resplendent with the neoliberal consensus that emerged after the Cold War and the collapse of communism. Ernst-Ulrich Petersmann, an international economic lawyer, argued that in a neoliberal economic system, the ‘invisible hand’ of market competition should be complemented by the ‘visible hand’ of the law. The WTO became this ‘visible hand’ of the law to regulate global trade. This period saw not only the legalisation of international relations (states accepting precise international law standards to judge their behaviour and delegating this power to judge to international courts) but also its judicialisation (the expansion of international courts and tribunals that dominate decision-making in place of national actors). This, arguably, erodes the sovereignty of nations as they lose control over critical decision-making. De-judicialisation, as Daniel Abebe and Tom Ginsburg define it, is the reverse phenomenon where countries weaken international courts to take back decision-making power. Given the emerging geo-economic challenges posed by a rising China, the U.S. wants to exercise full power over its trade policies, throwing off the shackles of the appellate body’s judicial review. This de-judicialisation should not be confused with exerting political oversight over the appellate body to improve its working. While Washington has identified multiple problems with the DSS, it has seldom offered constructive suggestions.
It is a fool’s errand to negotiate with the U.S. to put the appellate body back on track. One option that other countries have, as Henry Gao argues, is to elect the appellate body members by resorting to voting at the WTO’s General Council meeting. But this will antagonise the U.S. Are countries willing to go down that road?
Offering gratitude is a courteous way of acknowledging that you have benefited either from people around you in the past, or at present; or from Mother Nature and her varied creations; or been blessed by the Almighty.
During my childhood, my mother taught me to be grateful to the Almighty while praying at a temple, or before a picture of a deity. Feeding birds, animals or even ants in distress is an act of gratitude, often advised by astrologers. My mother would sometimes give me a fistful of grains and ask me to give leave them at an anthill, where hundreds of large ants scurried around. She would also urge me at least once a year to go to a local gaushala (a place where stray cows are taken care of by philanthropists), buy fodder and feed the cows.
There is no set format to offer gratitude, but while doing so, one does get a sense of fulfilment, and a feeling of giving back. After her retirement, my mother would wake at 5 a.m. daily and clean the whole street facing the length of our house, with a small broom. It was her way of offering quiet gratitude – to the neighbourhood for sustaining a sense of social togetherness.
Prof. Reshef Tenne, a noted scientist from Weizmann Institute of Science in Israel, told me recently that for about ten years now, he has been donating about 1% of his monthly income to voluntary, non-profit organisations involved in protecting Nature, assisting sick people, and/or providing food for the disabled. He said, “This is my gratitude to the society which encouraged me to be what I am today.”
Practising gratitude is an ongoing thing for me. I am 77, a retired scientist (ex-Associate Director, BARC), and educationist (ex-Chairman, A.E. Education Society), residing in Mumbai. When I look back at my life, I have benefited on numerous occasions: from relatives during childhood, classmates during school/college days, and professional colleagues at the workplace. It is built into my system to be grateful for these positive actions by those around me.
As a member of a WhatsApp group of my schoolmates, I discuss with them often how we flourished under our schoolteachers, and from the ambience of our school (a heritage institution established in 1915), where the best of facilities, including labs for science subjects, were maintained.
On video/audio calls almost every day, I discuss, with pride, our family lineage with my two elder cousins, aged 79 and 77, and recall the sacrifices of our ancestors, including my mother, who shaped our learning at school/college, and later helped our professional careers.
As a gesture of paying back to my profession, I helped about 20 young researchers during my career to secure post-doc positions in Europe, Japan and North America; and facilitated fellowships for PhD students to work in the labs of these countries for extended durations, to help them enrich their research profiles.
I have been publishing articles on some of my benefactors, be they my schoolteachers, my relatives, or my mentors in science, such as the late Prof. O. Kahn from Bordeaux, and the late Prof. E. Fawcett from the University of Toronto. I wrote a vox-pop article offering gratitude to Prof. Eiji Osawa, a celebrated computational chemist from Japan who missed out on getting a Nobel Prize in Chemistry even though he was the first to have proposed the structure of C-60, the fullerene molecule which laid the basis of nanoscience, primarily because he published his work in a Japanese language scientific journal in the 1970s, which went unnoticed.
Overwhelmed by the contributions of French scientists and pioneers, who shaped the modern world, I offered gratitude in the form of a special article.
It was not easy for me to convey how much I had benefited during the 45 years of my active service as a scientist at BARC, when I retired in 2010. I composed a poem to summarise it. The title of this poem was Ummeed seJyada, conveying that I benefited beyond my expectations from my interactions with BARC colleagues. I recited it on the occasion before nearly 100 senior scientist colleagues of this great institution, who comprise a Scientific Council which sits regularly to review the progress of various programmes run by this research Centre.
It was tricky for me to offer gratitude to a very senior academic who gave a push to my career several times, but from behind the scenes, for good reasons. I am glad I could express my humble gratitude to him in a subtle manner.
If the occasion allows, I show a slide or two about my benefactors in my lectures.
But, how do I show my gratitude to someone who cared for me like an angel all through my childhood in the 1950s? My family went through rough times largely due to financial deprivation, and for several years, a neighbourhood aunty stood like a shield to protect us from hardships. She saw to it that I had the same treatment as her own children. My last meeting with her was when she was 85. She was affectionate as before, as I sat in quiet gratitude before her. She asked a few questions about my family. Each time, it was my cousin, who had accompanied me, who replied, as I was overtaken by emotion and could hardly utter a word. Later, I put all my feelings of gratitude in an article, highlighting that perhaps I survived due to her kindness.
Offering gratitude has a soothing influence on us. At times, you may not get a chance to say thanks to benefactors directly. Then, look around and stand behind those who deserve support, but aren’t getting any. Do so with the same zeal with which someone had supported you when you were in distress. For sure, it will have the same soothing effect on you.
One of sport’s eternal qualities is its uncanny knack of replenishing itself. The old gives way to the new and the past yields place to the future. Men’s tennis though was resistant to this, where every new dawn — like Dominic Thiem’s and Daniil Medvedev’s US Open victories in 2020 and 2021 — ended up being a false hope. Wimbledon 2023 however made the sport feel young again as 20-year-old Carlos Alcaraz dethroned four-time defending champion and record 23-time Major winner Novak Djokovic following a five-set thriller that lasted nearly five hours. The youngest since a 17-year-old Boris Becker secured the men’s crown at SW19 in 1985, Alcaraz, the reigning US Open champion and World No.1, is only the sixth multiple Grand Slam titlist in the last two decades after Roger Federer, Rafael Nadal, Djokovic, Andy Murray and Stan Wawrinka. Just recently, the Spaniard had succumbed to Djokovic — 16 years his senior — in the French Open semifinals owing to stress-induced, full-body cramps. On Sunday, after he lost the first set and was a set-point down in the second, Alcaraz’s odds nose-dived. The Serb had lost just six of 329 completed best-of-five-set contests in which he had won the first set and just one of 272 in which he had won the opening two. But Alcaraz turned it around with a nerveless display of audacious shot-making to usher in the new order.
There was however one tradition in the men’s game that Alcaraz kept up. Ever since Federer won his first Major at Wimbledon 2003, prodigiously talented players have toppled the established rather than wait for a void to slip into. Nadal did that to Federer with his triumph at Wimbledon 2008, and Djokovic to both Nadal and Federer, across surfaces, for a good part of the last decade. Alcaraz has embarked on a similar path, to first fell his predecessors and carve out a niche for himself before supplanting them to become the next leader. The women’s game has not quite lent itself to such immaculate succession plans, and in Marketa Vondrousova it had another first-time Slam winner. The crafty 24-year-old from the Czech Republic was up against the sentimental favourite in Tunisia’s Ons Jabeur, who was gunning for her own maiden Slam crown after two failed attempts last year. But Vondrousova drew well from her experience of having played an equally talented but less flashy opponent in Ash Barty in the 2019 French Open final, to dismantle Jabeur, the World No.6, and become the first unseeded Wimbledon women’s singles champion in the Open Era (from 1968) and the sixth different in as many editions.
The 22nd Law Commission has called for responses to a proposal for a Uniform Civil Code in India. This has set off a debate, which has often been acrimonious. But the debate itself is much needed as Indians have never been consulted on the personal laws they are governed by. These laws were instituted by the British colonial government by giving a cursory hearing to the clergy, or religious scholars in the case of religions without one. The result was a religion-based set of personal laws for Hindus, Muslims and Christians. Whether the colonisers did this out of a deep concern for the sentiments of the natives or it was intended as another instrument in a strategy of divide and rule in order to hold India is irrelevant, but we should note the provenance of India’s personal laws.
Personal laws in India are boxed according to the religion or social origins of the citizen. However, it does not take much to see a fearful symmetry between them. This is their unmistakably patriarchal framing, whereby men are privileged at every turn. Thus, only a man can be the ‘karta’ or head of a Hindu Undivided Family, a divorced Muslim woman is not entitled to maintenance beyond a certain period, among some tribes of India, the custom is that women do not inherit ancestral property, and a Parsi woman who marries outside the community is excommunicated. So, from the point of view of women’s empowerment, India’s civil code is uniform already. As for the section of the population that we today refer to as the LGBT community, the British colonialists considered them mere flotsam and jetsam, to be ignored altogether. Not only did they not even merit a personal law but their actions deserved to be criminalised, even when they were consensual.
We can now see why we cannot consider ourselves to be a democracy so long as we continue with current approach to personal law. It is not because it is not the same for different religious groups but because their uniformly patriarchal core denies women equality before the law. Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s widely reported query as to how one country can be run on two laws misses this. But so does the Opposition when it rushes to defend inaction on these personal laws on grounds of diversity, which they hold as sacrosanct.
The antiquity of India’s customs and the diversity of its peoples are both brought up to make a case for tip-toeing around the existing personal laws despite their unequal rights for men and women. But is this a valid argument at all? India’s caste system is antique alright, but India’s lawmakers were wise enough to junk it in law very early on the history of independent India.
Next comes diversity. Opponents of reform seem to be unaware that they are extolling a diversity based on religion. Here it is worth recalling political scientist Pratap Bhanu Mehta’s reminder that India was not conceived of as “a federation of religions”. Similarly, during the deliberations of the Constituent Assembly, B.R. Ambedkar is said to have expressed surprise that religion was being given as much importance when choosing India’s political arrangements. These observations have a bearing on what is being debated today. Whether India’s civil code accords with the diktats of all religions is irrelevant. What matters is that it must be in accord with the democratic principles of liberty, equality and dignity. It is entirely possible to draft a civil code that preserves these ideals without any reference to religious practices. This would have the merit of being secular, in keeping with the defining character of India’s constitution.
Self-appointed heads of religious groups have resisted calls for a common civil code by resorting to the argument that it infringes upon religious freedom. They fail to see that religious freedom means the freedom to adopt the faith of one’s choice. In the domain of expression of faith, such as public worship, Indian courts have declared that it should conform to constitutional principles. In what may be considered one of the most significant social changes in India, restriction of temple entry to the avarna was discontinued almost a century ago. Much later, the Supreme Court of India struck down the practice of restricting women’s entry to the Sabarimala temple.
These milestones point to an understanding of the right to religion as being confined to choice of one’s faith and not to extra-constitutional expressions of it, such as the regulation of women’s autonomy by men. This takes us to the question of the efficacy of legislation in advancing rights. For instance, when it comes to temple entry, we find instances of Dalits being denied entry even today. There are also recorded cases of bigamy among Hindus, in some regions greater than among Muslims. But the conclusion drawn from this that banning polygamy among Muslims is discriminatory is a non sequitur. The response to finding bigamy among Hindus hardly invalidates a call for ending the provision for polygamy among Muslims. The right response would be to prosecute those Hindus violating the law.
What is relevant here is not parity among men of different religious groups when it comes to marriage, it is the rights of women within every religious grouping. The demand that sections of the population, whether tribal or Muslim, are entitled to separate personal laws even when they are gender unjust fails to acknowledge that they are equal beneficiaries of India’s democracy. Democracy guarantees them liberty and equality in all spheres of life, including access to the rule of law, freeing them from arbitrary governance. A reform of their personal laws to end gender discrimination, rendering them compatible with democracy, would be no more than to seek a balance between their rights and their responsibilities.
The obsession with parity among males across India’s religion-based personal codes blanks out the issue of the rights of its LGBT community. No amount of reform of the Hindu, Muslim and Christian personal codes can reach them, for they have been rendered invisible by these colonial-era constructions. If there were to be a common civil code applicable to all Indians irrespective of faith, gender and sexual orientation, the LGBT population could be accommodated within it. In its absence, an alternative would have to be conceived of. Given the recognition implicitly granted to them with the reading down of Section 377 of the Indian Penal Code in 2018 and a highly visible hearing of a petition in the Supreme Court to allow same-sex marriage, which concluded only recently, the question of a personal law for this group can no longer be postponed.
To be credible, the current debate on personal law must include the LGBT, for the questions of civil partnership, inheritance and adoption are as relevant to them as to other Indians. Mundane acts such as opening a bank account or purchasing life insurance would make one aware of this. Complacently confining the discussion of India’s personal laws within a Hindu-Muslim binary, leaves unrecognised the potential to empower a wide section of the population through their drastic overhaul. The combination of uniformly gender unjust personal laws and a disempowered LGBT population points to the advantage of having a universal civil code which encompasses all Indians. On Independence Day in 1947, Prime Minister Jawaharlal Nehru had, in a message to the nation, stated that the task before India was to “create social, economic and political institutions which will ensure justice and fullness of life to every man and woman”. No social cleavage has been imagined in this vision. A universal civil code would be a step in that direction.
the significant outcomes of Prime Minister Narendra Modi’s official state visit to the U.S. was the decision of the two countries to end six long-standing trade disputes at the World Trade Organization (WTO). The WTO Appellate Body has been redundant since 2019, and disputes filed into the ‘void’ will not be considered for adoption. In view of the continuing impasse in the appointment of ‘judges’ to hear appeals at the Appellate Body, a meaningful resolution of these disputes was almost out of sight. Three cases settled as part of the deal are before the defunct Appellate Body, while the rest could have potentially been ‘appealed into the void’. In this context, what has been achieved by both sides is without a parallel.
One of the early cases among the settled disputes involved a challenge of the domestic content requirements under India’s National Solar Mission. While disagreements persisted regarding India’s compliance with the WTO treaty obligations, a number of off-shoot proceedings arose out of this dispute with the U.S. seeking authorisation from the WTO’s Dispute Settlement Body for trade retaliation, which India contested. India too challenged certain sub-federal programmes implemented in the U.S. in the renewable energy sector and won the case. However, over time, some of the sub-federal schemes expired or were modified substantially, and the prospects of enforcing the WTO panel ruling became slim. Amending domestic laws to effect compliance with international treaty obligations is a matter of great political sensitivity, especially in the U.S. That said, while India’s victory in the original WTO proceedings was significant, the U.S. also retrieved certain gains in the subsequent compliance proceedings. This dispute was poised to reach the Appellate Body and could have remained moribund for years.
India can also breathe a sigh of relief from settling the challenges involving some of its foreign trade policy schemes, including the special economic zone (SEZ) and export-oriented unit schemes. In particular, certain corporate tax deductions provided under the SEZ scheme faced an uncertain future. While India’s appeal to the defunct Appellate Body would have kept the dispute dormant, India had voluntarily removed some controversial schemes, including the Merchandise Exports from India Scheme. India also initiated a comprehensive process to reform its SEZ law. However, perfect WTO compliance in the short run in the export subsidy proceedings would not have been easy for India.
Against that backdrop, settling disputes in all six cases shows a pragmatic approach on the part of two strong trading partners. They have accepted each other’s domestic challenges in dispute compliance and realised the importance of burying differences.
However, at the heart of the trade deal was an understanding reached in two ongoing disputes, where the WTO panel process is alive, but kept on a temporary hold. The first involved a challenge by India against the controversial Section 232 tariffs imposed under the U.S. Trade Expansion Act, 1962. The U.S. had imposed an additional duty of 25% on steel and 10% on aluminium, triggering a series of WTO challenges and unilateral trade responses. India considered these as safeguard measures and imposed retaliatory measures. The U.S. considered India’s retaliatory duties excessive, while India believed that it could retain these duties as long as the Section 232 tariffs remained. While the disputes are proposed to be terminated, both India and the U.S. would not forego their measures but would modify them to meet each other’s concerns and interests. The U.S. will receive and consider requests for exclusions from Section 232 measures with approval rates of 70% for steel products and 80% for aluminium products from India. While the importers in the U.S. have to file exclusions applications, the committed approval rates provide a tangible market access opportunity for India’s steel and aluminium exporters, who have experienced serious challenges in competing in the U.S. market.
In return for committing to the stated proportions of approval rates for steel and aluminium, the U.S. has received an assurance from India that it would remove the additional duties, which were retaliatory in nature, on certain U.S. agricultural imports which had suffered certain collateral damage on account of the Section 232 measures. India will now revert to the currently applied ‘most favoured nation’ (MFN) rate for eight products. In other words, India is only removing the retaliatory duties on these eight products and not offering any preferential concessions on them. The MFN-applied rates would continue to apply to these products.
Finding mutually agreed solutions to long-standing disputes is not unfamiliar in the WTO. However, reaching a deal on six separate disputes covering a range of sectors and products is unprecedented. A greater use of diplomacy and bilateral negotiations can be more practically useful when adjudicatory outcomes are not immediately available or politically infeasible. In other words, the decision to end these disputes seeks to script a new chapter in India-U.S. trade relations and sets a template for other WTO members to emulate. As Commerce and Industries’ Minister Piyush Goyal noted, the disputes deal was struck at a time when India-U.S. trade relations are ‘scaling new heights’ and could ‘deepen greater economic engagements’.
Over the last few weeks, the debate has become more intense with the Lieutenant Governor’s administration introducing a slew of schemes for homeless and landless people, and migrant workers. Regional parties have expressed concern that these schemes will open doors for outsiders to settle in J&K.
A week ago, Lieutenant Governor Manoj Sinha announced a scheme to grant five marlas (252 square feet) of land to the landless population under the Pradhan Mantri Awas Yojana-Gramin (PMAY-G). Around 2,711 households have been designated as “landless” in the first phase. Besides this, the Union Ministry of Rural Development has set a target to grant 1.99 lakh houses to the homeless population in J&K by 2024.
Weeks earlier, Mr. Sinha had announced the Affordable Rental Housing Complexes (ARHC) scheme, which provides rental housing for Economically Weaker Sections (EWS) and Low-Income Groups (LIGs). The scheme covers urban migrants including labourers, street vendors and rickshaw pullers working in the Union Territory. Laying the eligibility criteria for this scheme, the J&K Housing Board said it would accept applications “from any citizen of India who migrated to Jammu from any part of India temporarily or permanently, for employment, education, long-term tourist visit, etc.” It is likely that migrant workers and their children would become eligible for domicile in J&K with this scheme. They can apply for land and jobs if they have lived in the UT for 15 years or have studied for seven years or appeared in the Class X or Class XII examination, as per the new domicile laws passed after 2019.
Regional parties are also concerned about constant amendments to laws. J&K has recorded the highest number of amendments to land laws and re-allocations in the past four years. The administration amended the rules of the J&K Industrial Policy 2021-30, the J&K Industrial Land Allotment Policy 2021-30, and the J&K Private Industrial Estate Development Policy 2021-30 to make make available 30,000 kanals (3,749.9 acres) for industries to woo outside investment. In 2021, amendments were made to land laws passed after 2019 to further liberalise the conversion of agricultural land for industrial purposes.
Even political parties which operate from the Jammu division, where the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has significant support, have been critical of the latest moves. Various parties have pledged to oppose any move that seeks to provide land to outsiders. Peoples Democratic Party president Mehbooba Mufti quoted the Ministry of Housing and Urban Affairs which said that 19,045 people were homeless in J&K in 2021. She said that there was a glaring mismatch between the official figure for the homeless and the target to grant 1.99 lakh houses to the homeless. She said that the administration’s intent seemed to be to “settle outsiders” and “import slums” to J&K. Omar Abdullah from the National Conference and Sajad Lone from the Peoples Conference warned the administration against accommodating people beyond 2019 and sought clarification on the eligibility criteria.
According to the Lieutenant Governor’s administration, those residing on forest land, Rakhs, farmland and the Dachigam National Park, where construction is not allowed, will be provided land in the first phase. However, the administration remained silent on whether there would be evictions. It has also considered designating as landless those people who are occupying custodian land — pockets of land left behind by those who migrated from J&K to Pakistan or Pakistan-occupied Kashmir in 1947. Mr. Sinha has defended the PMAY-G saying it would enable the landless poor to own land and raise their standards of living.
However, faced with a public outcry, the administration hastened to clarify that only 2,711 landless families which were part of the 2018-19 Permanent Wait List of Homeless Persons of J&K (before the Centre ended special status) would be provided land under the scheme. The controversy reflects the growing chasm between the J&K political class and the BJP-ruled Centre.
In the days when there was no money in cricket, England, part of a colonial power, and Australia, a largely white colony, ruled the game. As the two original members of the ICC (International Cricket Council now), they had the power of veto. It was a skewed system.
Still, England saw it as a moral responsibility to take the game to the colonies. Perhaps they needed teams they thought they could beat; perhaps it was a way of inculcating certain values in the locals. Perhaps was to emphasise Englishness through sport.
Whatever it was, and despite the obvious condescension involved, the game spread. India, the West Indies, New Zealand were all playing Test cricket by the 1930s; South Africa played their first Test in 1889, and played a ‘World Cup’ with the other two ICC members of the time, England and Australia in 1912. That triangular series flopped badly. Perhaps the realisation dawned then that the cozy club was too cozy. There needed to be greater variety, a better range of styles, more diversity.
Now, over a century later, history (and geography) has been replaced by money as the basis of the cozy club. England have some, Australia have a bit, and India have lots. In 2014, these three countries decided to hijack the sport by proposing a share of the ICC’s financial pie that gave them the biggest portions and left the crumbs for the rest.
India were already the richest and most influential cricketing nation. I wrote in these columns then that the problem with a unipolar world is that the greatest good for the greatest number is replaced by the greatest good for number one. The administration of cricket has always been guided by self-interest. As Osman Samiuddin wrote in Wisden India Almanack, “decision-making (was) about bigger self-interests leaning down heavily on smaller self-interests until an overlap was found — or the right bargain struck.”
Self-interest is not such a bad thing if it coincides with universal interest, but it seldom does. Nearly a decade after the Big Three’s hijack bid, the ICC has proposed a similar surplus revenue-sharing model. In the cycle, 2024-27, the ICC proposes that of its $600 million annual surplus India take home $231 million or 38.5%. England get the next highest share of $41.33 million (6.89%), followed by Australia ($ 37.53 or 6.25 percent) down to Afghanistan ($16.82 million or 2.8 percent). The proposal will be discussed at the ICC meeting next month.
How did the ICC arrive at these figures? Each full member (there are 12 Test-playing countries) starts level. Then such things as cricket history, performance at ICC events, progress of women’s cricket and commercial contribution to the kitty are considered. There is a vagueness about some of these factors (how do you put a number to cricket history?), and the marking will necessarily be arbitrary. India’s commercial value, however, cannot be doubted.
For so long after their debut in 1932 were India in the second tier of international cricket, with few victories, less money and fewer chances of getting to the high table that the table-turning provoked feelings of unbridled nationalism. Through all those decades, India had one strength above all others — its population. We were people then, we are a market now. Television and digital media are willing to pay mind-boggling sums of money to capture this market.
India have reached a situation where they don’t need the ICC money. The Big Three apart, most countries are dependent on ICC handouts and cannot afford to displease India whose tours fill their coffers.
India demanding their pound of flesh as the country that contributes the greatest amount of money to the cricket economy is understandable. Self-interest rules. But shouldn’t the ICC look beyond that and towards the growth of the game? Sure, in the short term the ICC cannot do without India. But India cannot do without the ICC either, or they will be reduced to playing a couple of countries over and over again till television loses interest.
India’s argument that a lot of the money goes to corrupt national boards that do nothing for cricket is a valid one. The ICC must put in place systems to check this. It cannot be the ICC’s sole policy to keep India happy and let the rest take care of itself. Governing bodies have greater responsibilities than national ones.
There is money in cricket, as ICC’s $600 million surplus shows. But not all of it is going towards development of the game. The countries that need it most are getting the least amount, and that cannot be good for the game.
It is a warm July morning. We have a few days off school, and I have been sent to Phuphee’s house. When I stay with her, she always lets me sleep next to her because she knows I am terrified of sleeping on my own. Phuphee’s room has two sets of windows, both on the same side. Even when it is bright outside, only half of her room is lit up, the rest sits softly in half light. The glass on the windows is made up of different hues of yellows, greens, reds, and blues. When the light streams through them, it results in a riot of colours as if a million rainbows come to life all at the same time. She always leaves the windows open during the summer and it mystifies me that mosquitoes invade every other part of the house except her room. She always teases my uncle about why there are so many mosquitoes in his room.
“What kind of a peer [spiritual doctor] are you?” she would say to him. “Your patients will have to rid themselves of malaria first and then work on their souls!” He would seethe.
This morning, while I lay on the floor bed, I could hear Phuphee saying her morning namaz. After a little while, I hear her recite the Quran, so I get up and walk outside. She is sitting under the walnut tree, with a shawl draped over her shoulders. As soon as I am close, without even looking up, she lifts her left arm high above her shoulder, making space for me. I snuggle up to her, breathing deeply the scents of cardamom, cinnamon and flour, and listen to her. When she is done, she says prayers over me and blows on my face and chest asking God to watch over me. But suddenly she is distracted by something. She looks up at the sky and whispers, “They are coming.”
As soon as she says this, all the other members get to work on different things. Some start on breakfast and some on lunch. Next to her kitchen garden is a massive apple orchard, in the middle of which is a little grass covered clearing. She puts down a small carpet on one side and takes out her large samovar, which will keep the kehwa [tea made from cardamom, cinnamon and saffron] hot. When it is ready, she makes a fire on the side and cooks rice with turmeric and salt. When it is done, she places it in a large metal bucket and adds golden fried shallots and a little hot oil. She places it next to the samovar along with a jar of warmed mustard oil. A few minutes later, I see a group of women walking towards us. Most of them are from Phuphee’s village whom I recognise, but a few I don’t. I wonder why they are here.
They greet her and then sit on the grass. One lady takes charge of serving the kehwa and another of the tehar. They are all chatting amongst themselves, when one of the ladies, who is around 70 starts singing. Everyone calls her Aapa. She sings a poem by Habba Khatoon, a Kashmiri poet. As she sings the others join in. Some shed a few tears and some sigh. She speaks about how loving and gentle her parents were when they were still alive, how loved and safe she had felt with them and how it had all changed when she had gotten married.
Nothing, not even Hindenburg Research, seems to stop the advance of Indian big business. The Adani Group continues with its acquisitions, even if at a slower pace, and has been able to persuade financial markets to lend it more money, notwithstanding assessments that it is over-dependent on debt. Reliance Industries Limited has announced the demerger of its financial services arm to establish a new entity, which media speculation sees as a bid by the group to establish a dominant presence in the financial services industry. The demerger is being seen as a repeat of the strategy adopted by the group in areas stretching from telecommunications and the retail trade to the media and entertainment businesses. Other business groups such as the Tatas and the Aditya Birla empire seem to also be performing well. The biggest of India’s big businesses seem to be thriving.
But this assessment is not true of all of business in India. It is not just that small- and medium-scale firms, not to mention the large mass of informal enterprises, are not doing well and are yet to recover their COVID-19-inflicted losses. Many established big business names do not share the good fortune of the big few. A former Reserve Bank of India Deputy Governor and his co-author report in a much-cited paper that the share of assets in the non-financial sectors owned by the Big-5 business groups has risen from 10% in 1991 to nearly 18% in 2021, whereas the share of the next five has fallen from 18% to less than 9%. While their claim that increased concentration is contributing to inflation has been challenged, the evidence they provide of significantly increased concentration has not.
The dangers of such a rapid rise in industrial concentration have been flagged in the past across the world. The process feeds on itself by using market power to stifle competition. It results in profit inflation or profiteering, through the manipulation of costs and prices. In the process it fosters extreme asset and income inequality. It triggers efforts to influence institutions of democracy and, through means such as the capture of the media, it dilutes the role that civil society can play as a countervailing power. In time, it leads to undue corporate influence over political processes and the formulation of policy, with tendencies bordering on state capture.
These fears were strengthened by the recognition that these tendencies are not stalled by competition in the ‘market’, but are a consequence of the functioning of markets. Given asset and income inequality, and therefore differential power among economic agents, the functioning of the ‘market’ favours, for multiple reasons, those who are asset-rich, leading to concentration and centralisation. That recognition led to the argument that it is not only necessary to regulate markets to address the malicious outcomes their functioning can give rise to, but that there is a need to physically prevent the growth of dominant businesses and excessively large conglomerates or even break up those that are seen as too big for comfort.
The difficulty is that while civil society voices can make a case for such action, in the final analysis it is the state that must implement the needed policies. And the nature of the state is not independent of the influence that the structures in society exert.
Democracies have battled hard to force governments to maintain some distance from private capital in general and big business in particular. Those efforts have been partially successful in specific historical contexts, leading among other things to strong action against monopoly and trustification. Similar efforts were seen in India immediately after Independence, as a national state emerged from a freedom movement that was a broad alliance of diverse classes. But, over the years the distance between state and private capital has narrowed hugely, leading to the current situation in which the state promotes big business rather than regulate or curb the latter. Within that framework the decisions as to how many and which business groups to promote, and to what extent, is arbitrary.
Three trends have signalled this narrowing of political distance between the state and big business. First, the embrace of neoliberalism by powerful voices within and outside the state. This implied adoption of the view that the role of the state is not to regulate private capital, but to facilitate its growth as means to all round economic progress. In fact, advocates of neoliberalism have argued that the competition that would be fostered by a liberalised regime will counter concentration. The reverse has happened, despite early signs in some sectors that competition had increased. Even in areas such as telecommunications and civil aviation, the initial increase in the number of new players only triggered a process of churning, with associated social waste, that has finally left a few, with signs of collusion among them. The consumer will be the loser.
The second is the propagation of the view that the state must help strengthen domestic big business to not just hold its own against giant global competitors, but to step beyond Indian shores. State policy, diplomacy and public resources, including those channelled through public banks had to serve as instruments for the purpose. While liberalisation opened up Indian markets, and subjected much of Indian business to global competition, state intervention was modified to protect and promote sections of big business, not least through large-scale subsidies and transfers.
Third is the refusal to reduce the influence of money in politics. In the event, closeness of political parties (and therefore the governments they may lead) to big business has turned out to be a prerequisite for garnering the resources needed to “manage” elections and win electoral support. Over time, policy has been changed to legitimise corporate donations to political parties, including through the infamous electoral bonds scheme.
What is frightening in the current situation is that these tendencies have coalesced into a strategy where in the name of strengthening Indian business as part of promoting the national interest, a very few business groups have been actively favoured by the state. Under normal circumstances, this should have led to widespread resentment and dissent. Not just among those in the lower segments of the asset and income pyramid, but among more powerful sections closer to the top who are being ignored. That would spell instability and also perhaps serve as corrective. But that has not happened in the new India, because again in the name of national interest, state power is being used to suppress any such dissent. The result is an almost relentless march to extreme concentration of wealth and economic power.
In Maharashtra, the era of Congress dominance, which had weakened by the 1990s, sputtered to an end in 2014. Yet, the Bharatiya Janata Party (BJP) has not been quite able to take over the reins from the Congress-Nationalist Congress Party (NCP) combine, given the attitude of the local elites in regions such as western Maharashtra, leading to a chaotic decade of attrition. Whether the dramatic switch of the Ajit Pawar NCP faction to the National Democratic Alliance (NDA) signals the birth pangs of a new era of the BJP’s dominance, or is merely a contingent truce, remains to be seen.
The BJP’s singular majority at the national level since 2014 has whetted its desire for State-level dominance in a number of States. The success of these various State campaigns has been predicated to a large extent on an array of mass defections from erstwhile ruling and/or primary Opposition parties. The volatile politics of the northeastern States, dependent on central aid, fell to this trend the earliest.
The BJP became the ruling party in Assam in 2016 following key defections from the Asom Gana Parishad and the ruling Congress. This was the model of rapid party expansion, built on defections of leaders particularly from dominant caste/classes, which was later used in Tripura and the wider northeast. In Arunachal Pradesh, in 2016, almost the entire State unit of the Congress — 44 out of 45 MLAs, including the Chief Minister, Pema Khandu — defected overnight to an NDA ally, and shortly thereafter to the BJP.
The national context is particularly important because the politics of Maharashtra, like the politics of Assam, deeply intersects with the slow-moving terrain of national politics. This has provided the State with its characteristic political stability, underwritten by the hegemony of the dominant farming caste of the Maratha-Kunbis, and bolstered with the support of a largely sympathetic Centre. Political scientist Suhas Palshikar has suggested that the traditional “Congress system”, the model of informal accommodation of diverse constituencies within the party, has survived perhaps the longest in Maharashtra.
Until 2014, the Congress party (or a breakaway Congress faction) ruled the State for almost the entire post-Independence period. The State remained largely unaffected by the ideological challenge of the Mandal revolution which reshaped the political structure of northern India. The only significant exception was the three-year period between 1995-1998 when the NDA alliance (the Shiv Sena and the BJP) took control of the State. This short-lived, abortive transition in State politics also coincided, unsurprisingly, with a hazy period of national transition marked by the NDA coalition’s ascent to power at the national level.
The reason why national and State politics move in lock step in Maharashtra has much to do with its political economy. The State has not evolved a regional business elite like in Tamil Nadu, Andhra Pradesh or Gujarat. Instead, the commanding heights of the economy are still controlled by a pan-India business elite.
Journalist Harish Damodaran, in his book, India’s New Capitalists: Caste, Business, and Industry in a Modern Nation (2008), drew a distinction between the Patels and Marathas, the dominant agrarian castes in Gujarat and Maharashtra, respectively, in terms of the trajectory of their upward mobility. While the Patels have moved over the last three decades from agricultural co-operatives to modern urban sectors such as finance and petrochemicals, the Marathas have lagged behind. Therefore, the NCP and the Shiv Sena have disavowed a pronounced regionalist agenda. Instead, regional parties attempt to co-opt the national business elite, and hanker after a share of power at the national level in order to predictably divert State resources as patronage into rural co-operatives and allied sectors.
Therefore, Ajit Pawar, in the (as yet one-sided) battle with his uncle Sharad Pawar for control of the NCP, has age on his side as well as political history. One can see in junior Pawar’s coup a reprise of 1978, or 1999, when Sharad Pawar formed a breakaway Congress during the Congress’s spell in the political wilderness at the national level. More precisely, Ajit Pawar’s decision to join forces with a Narendra Modi-led BJP echoes Sharad Pawar’s move to merge his Congress(S) into the Rajiv Gandhi-led Congress(I) in 1986. Much like the NCP, the Congress(S) made this calculated manoeuvre despite being the largest Opposition party in the State. Also, in both cases, the crafty Pawars hitched their political future to the principal ruling party which also commanded a formidable majority at the central level. In fact, it was this voluntary vacation of the oppositional space that allowed the Shiv Sena to expand in rural Maharashtra, channelling discontent against an entrenched establishment. Bal Thackeray’s Shiv Sena surged from a single seat in the 1980s to 52 seats in 1990, emerging as the principal Opposition party.
The sociological base of the NCP, much like the Congress(S) at the time, functions as a powerful constraint on the party. In 1977, scholar Donald Rosenthal wrote of the “expansive elite” of Marathas in western Maharashtra, drawing political control from a colonisation of State policies in the areas of agricultural investment, education and rural self-government. The NCP’s political support still remains rooted to this rural economic base, consolidating the Maratha elites into political networks and then linking them to a mass voter-base, even as the urban economic landscape has transformed over the last five decades. The sugar cooperatives of Maharashtra, as Damodaran wrote, are ‘self-governing republics headed by powerful chieftains’ who follow dynastic lineages to durably embed themselves in local politics. This is a decentralised confederacy, not a command-and-control structure.
The informal organisational base of the NCP constitutes a major reason why the party has melted away into the NDA camp, while the Shiv Sena, in comparison, has proved more resilient. Political scientists Chhibber et al. (2014) had coded the organisational strength of various parties into three blocks: weakly organised; moderately organised and strongly organised parties. The relevant parameters are formal organisational structures governing channels upward mobility, linkages to an activist base, and political mobilisation between elections, among others. In their calculations, the Shiv Sena had moved from a party that was a strongly organised party to one that was a moderately organised party during its life cycle. In contrast, the NCP (in 1999 and 2004) has been coded as a weakly organised party.
The Shiv Sena of Uddhav Thackeray has retained to a large extent its organisational base in large urban areas such as Mumbai, Nashik and Pune. The party has a hierarchical system of control linking affiliated bodies of urban workers and a large activist base dotting numerous party shakhas, to the charismatic personality of the supreme leader. The Thackerays not only closely control appointments and decision-making but also evoke a populist-emotional appeal among the base of the party. Consider the limited number of municipal corporators that have shifted to the Eknath Shinde Sena, over the last year, and the mass defections of NCP corporators to the Ajit Pawar camp.
As political scientist Herbert Kitschelt, among others, have written, political parties are but a collection of numerous power-seekers, kept together with an array of incentives. Local elites across Maharashtra have been facing the daunting task of rethinking and recalibrating these incentives. Of course, the Thackeray Sena has also been weakened in rural areas from the defections of several local party bosses last year. Yet, it is Sharad Pawar‘s ideologically non-descript NCP, whose politics remained confined to the adroit management of political networks, which is facing the more serious existential crisis.

